# Choose Dataset(s)

Choosing the dataset(s) you plan to make open is the first step â€“ though
remember that the whole process of opening up data is iterative and you can
return to this step if you encounter problems later on.

If you already know exactly what dataset(s) you plan to open up you can move
straight on to the next section. However, in many cases, especially for large
institutions, choosing which datasets to focus on is a challenge. How should
one proceed in this case?

Creating this list should be a quick process that identifies which datasets
could be made open to start with. There will be time at later stages to check
in detail whether each dataset is suitable.

There is **no requirement** to create a comprehensive list of your datasets.
The main point to bear in mind is whether it is feasible to publish this data
at all (whether openly or otherwise) - see :ref:\`this previous section
<what-data-can-be-open\>\`.

## Asking the community

We recommend that you ask the community in the first instance. That is the
people who will be accessing and using the data, as they are likely to have
a good understanding of which data could be valuable.

1.  Prepare a short list of potential datasets that you would like feedback on.
    It is not essential that this list concurs with your expectations, the main
    intention is to get a feel for the demand.  This could be based on other
    countries' :term:\`open data\` catalogs.

2.  Create a request for comment.

3.  Publicise your request with a webpage. Make sure that it is possible to
    access the request through its own URL. That way, when shared via social
    media, the request can be easily found.

4.  Provide easy ways to submit responses. Avoid requiring registration, as it
    reduces the number of responses.

5.  Circulate the request to relevant mailing lists, forums and individuals,
    pointing back to the main webpage.

6.  Run a consultation event. Make sure you run it at a convenient time where
    the average business person, data wrangler and official can attend.

7.  Ask a politician to speak on your agency's behalf. Open data is very likely
    to be part of a wider policy of increasing access to government
    information.

## Cost basis

How much money do agencies spend on the collection and maintainence of data
that they hold? If they spend a great deal on a particular set of data, then it
is highly likely that others would like to access it.

This argument may be fairly susceptible to concerns of freeriding. The question
you will need to respond to is, "Why should other people get information for
free that is so expensive?". The answer is that the expense is absorbed by the
public sector to perform a particular function. The cost of sending that data,
once it has been collected, to a third party is approximately nothing.
Therefore, they should be charged nothing.

## Ease of release

Sometimes, rather than deciding which data would be most valuable, it could be
useful to take a look at which data is easiest to get into the public's hands.
Small, easy releases can act as the catalyst for larger behavioural change
within organisations.

Be careful with this approach however. It may be the case that these small
releases are of so little value that nothing is built from them.  If this
occurs, faith in the entire project could be undermined.

## Observe peers

Open data is a growing movement. There are likely to be many people in your
area who understand what other areas are doing. Formulate a list on the basis
of what those agencies are doing.
