---
title:  "Saving 6 Million Pounds in 15 Minutes -  Value of Open Data"
permalink: /value-stories/2015-04-26-saving-6-million-pounds_in_15_minutes/
authors: 
- Katelyn Rogers
---

### Whether you are looking for a new apartment, calculating the best way to get from A to B or deciding who to vote for, making informed decisions nowadays requires data.  Of course, it is unlikely that we would be doing all the data collection, curation, cleaning and crunching for every one of life’s many questions on our own. We rely on infomediaries to bring us this data, reconfigured as graphics, applications, or platforms, to allow us the luxury of informed decision making. Unfortunately,  data collection,  cleaning and crunching remains an arduous process. As a result, we are limited in the questions we can use data to answer. 

Lets imagine that I am a government official interested in preserving the quality of essential government services in a time when most departments are being asked to deliver more with less. Eliminating waste without sacrificing quality of care is an obvious priority. I probably have a few theories about where the government is overspending that I am interested in investigating but doing so comes with a trade off. For me to investigate whether my hunches are correct, the potential savings I expect to find have to be weighed against the cost, in term time and effort, of identifying and eliminating this waste in order to reallocate these freed up resources.  If my inquiry spans multiple departments, I can send a memo to everyone concerned asking for a given dataset and that assuming I know who to request the data from. 

This problem is not unique to government. It actually highlights one of the primary challenges for data driven decision making. If I have a question or an idea that data might help me solve, __a disproportionate amount of the time will be spent finding, scraping or requesting and cleaning data before I can even begin to use it to answer my question.__ One might assume that within the government, there would be mechanisms in place to facilitate data sharing but it turns out that this is often not the case, at least not in any meaningful way.  __One of the unexpected outcomes of open data is that it has proven to be an incredibly effective mechanism for breaking down departmental silos and along data to flow across the government.__ 

In 2010, the UK began publishing government spending data as open data and ultimately expanding this effort to include transactional data in 2011. There were a number of reasons given for publishing transactional spending data but the arguments were mainly focused around increasing transparency and accountability. A few years later Liam Neeson, the UK Government Chief Technology Officer came along and wanted to find out how much the government was spending on market research across its various departments. He, unlike our hypothetical civil servant above, had another option. Liam spent 10 minutes puruseing the government’s spending on Open Spending, the community owned platform the government used to publish transactional spending data, and in the process uncovered a surprising fact. 


He discovered that the government was spending the majority of its market research budgets — around 6 million pounds that year — on services from one company, and that in fact, many departments across the government were individually being charged a substantial sum for access to a single report from this particular company. After uncovering this, Liam’s office negotiated a cross government deal for access to the report, saving the taxpayers roughly 5.5 million pounds with just a few minutes of research work and the level of transparency that is enabled by open data and the Open Spending platform.

Providing civil servants the ability to get actionable intelligence immediately was never the objective of publishing spending data as open data. It is nevertheless been one of the most pronounced outcomes. It should not come as a surprise that when  governments began publishing data on data portals, we discovered that one of the primary users was the government itself. In British Colombia for example, almost one third of the traffic on their open data portal was generated by government IP addresses. 

Six million pounds is only about .0008% of the UK government’s budget. Would Liam really have been incentivised to investigate market research spending had this required sending individual data requests to every government department for savings of a mere .0008% of the total government budget?  Nevertheless, while this savings might be considered pennies in the grand scheme of things, the figure represents 93% of the budget for the Department of Education’s School Meal Programme in 2011 ([Spending Stories])http://spendingstories.org/#/search/?lang=en_GB&q=6000000&c=GBP&visualization=scale) & [The Guardian](http://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2011/oct/26/government-spending-department-2010-11)), around 2% of the [£350m a year slashed from the legal aid budgets](http://www.theguardian.com/law/2010/nov/15/legail-aid-clarke-spending-cuts) in 2010, or the salaries of  over [270 new teachers](http://www.education.gov.uk/get-into-teaching/about-teaching/salary). In a time when every department is being asked to deliver more with less, it is essential that the government is able to allocate resources in the best possible way. 

While enormous strides have been made, data remains too hard to get and use because there is too much friction between data. This is particularly true across distributed communities or in this case, siloed government departments. The unintended effects of publishing open data has been the reduction of friction thus reducing the cost of data driven investigations.  
