# What is Open Data?

This handbook is about *open data* but what exactly is it? In particular what
makes *open* data open, and what sorts of data are we talking about?

## What is Open?

This handbook is about open data - but what exactly is *open* data? For our
purposes, open data is as defined by the [Open
Definition](http://opendefinition.org/):

*Open data is data that can be freely used, re-used and redistributed by anyone
- subject only, at most, to the requirement to attribute and sharealike.*

The [full Open Definition](http://opendefinition.org/okd/) gives precise
details as to what this means. To summarize the most important:

-   **Availability and Access:** the data must be available as a whole and at
    no more than a reasonable reproduction cost, preferably by downloading over
    the internet. The data must also be available in a convenient and
    modifiable form.
-   **Re-use and Redistribution:** the data must be provided under terms that
    permit re-use and redistribution including the intermixing with other
    datasets.
-   **Universal Participation:** everyone must be able to use, re-use and
    redistribute - there should be no discrimination against fields of
    endeavour or against persons or groups. For example, ‘non-commercial’
    restrictions that would prevent ‘commercial’ use, or restrictions of use
    for certain purposes (e.g. only in education), are not allowed.

If you’re wondering why it is so important to be clear about what open means
and why this definition is used, there’s a simple answer: **interoperability.**

Interoperability denotes the ability of diverse systems and organizations to
work together (inter-operate). In this case, it is the ability to interoperate
- or intermix - different datasets.

Interoperability is important because it allows for different components to
work together. This ability to componentize and to ‘plug together’ components
is essential to building large, complex systems. Without interoperability this
becomes near impossible — as evidenced in the most famous myth of the Tower of
Babel where the (in)ability to communicate (to interoperate) resulted in the
complete breakdown of the tower-building effort.

We face a similar situation with regard to data. The core of a “commons” of
data (or code) is that one piece of “open” material contained therein can be
freely intermixed with other “open” material. This interoperability is
absolutely key to realizing the main practical benefits of “openness”: the
dramatically enhanced ability to combine different datasets together and
thereby to develop more and better products and services (these benefits are
discussed in more detail in the section on ‘why’ open data).

Providing a clear definition of openness ensures that when you get two open
datasets from two different sources, you will be able to combine them together,
and it ensures that we **avoid our own ‘tower of babel’: lots of datasets but
little or no ability to combine them together into the larger systems where the
real value lies.**

## What Data are You Talking About?

Readers have already seen examples of the sorts of data that are or may become
open - and they will see more examples below. However, it will be useful to
quickly outline what sorts of data are, or could be, open -- and, equally
importantly, what won’t be open.

The key point is that when opening up data, the focus is on non-personal data,
that is, data which does not contain information about specific individuals.

Similarly, for some kinds of government data, national security restrictions
may apply.
